https://code.kx.com/insights/accelerators/fsi/setup.html

# Setup - kdb products

Original URL: https://code.kx.com/insights/accelerators/fsi/setup.html

# Deployment and Content Configuration

Generally FSI accelerators are set up and deployed in the same way. Each
quickstart will give specific steps relevant to the specific accelerator. This
section guides you generally through the deployment of an FSI Accelerator
package and provide some examples of how you can configure them to cater to
your specific use-cases.

## Pre-requisites

Before deploying an FSI accelerator package, ensure the following pre-
requisites are in place:

In addition, if you're unfamiliar with how
[packaging](../../enterprise/packaging/index.html) works in kdb Insights
Enterprise, it's recommended to read up on it before continuing, as this
provides the foundation for how an FSI accelerator package is configured,
packaged and deployed.

Note

When installing kdb Insights Enterprise, ensure the following environmental
variable is added under **every** aggregator and resource coordinator in the
values.yaml. Do this **before** running the `kxi install` command._

    
    
      aggregator:
        env:
          KXI_PACKAGES: fsi-lib:1.0.0
    
    
    
      resource-coordinator:
        env:
          KXI_PACKAGES: fsi-lib:1.0.0
    

If any custom configuration or code is required it should be included in a
package and the package name should also be added to KXI_PACKAGES  [Adding
Custom Configuration or Code](customize.html#adding-custom-configuration-or-
code).

## How to get an FSI Accelerator Package

To get started with an FSI accelerator, you need to download the corresponding
packages.

This will be an `fsi-lib` package and your accelerator package.

Refer to the corresponding quickstart for step by step instructions.

## About the FSI Accelerator Packages

The FSI accelerators are comprised of 2 packages, `fsi-lib` and the specific
accelerator itself.

### fsi-lib

The `fsi-lib` package is where the code for the core FSI accelerator APIs such
as [getTicks](getTicks.html) lives. This package is not customizable. All FSI
accelerators use this common set of functionality

### fsi- packages

The package contains the definitions for the FSI accelerator database,
[pipelines](dataIngestion.html) and schemas. This package is intended to be
customized and changed, as is discussed further here.

