https://code.kx.com/q4m3/preface/

# Preface | Q for Mortals V3.1 - Q for Mortals

Original URL: https://code.kx.com/q4m3/preface/

# Preface

This text represents a complete rewrite of _Q for Mortals_. Although the Table
of Contents may look familiar, very little of the original text survived. This
version targets all the features of q3.2, as well as correcting both errors of
omission and commission in the original. All code snippets have been copied
from the q3.2 console but they should work unchanged in q3.3. Please send
corrections, additions and constructive suggestions to
[q4mortals@gmail.com](mailto:q4mortals@gmail.com).

A significant improvement in this version is that the author was learning q
while writing the original, but he actually knows some q now. One thing that
hasn’t changed is the author’s philosophy: You can only be young once but you
can be immature your entire life.

Numerous people have been instrumental in shepherding this to print. First and
foremost, the folks at First Derivatives and KX. Of course, there would be no
q gods or mortals without Arthur Whitney’s brilliant invention of q and kdb+.
Janet Lustgarten has been supportive of the effort from day one. Abby Gruen
served as the midwife during the book’s birth. Charles Skelton kept me honest.
Simon Garland patiently answered my innumerable naïve q questions. Brian
Conlon and Victoria Shanks invited me to announce the book at KX meetups.

Many colleagues suffered through early drafts of the text. My go-to
proofreaders were Jose Cambronero, Kevin Ching, Simon Garland, Fermin Reig and
Mike Rosenberg. They persevered through my horrendous typing and Word’s
inability to spell-check the document – invariably insisting it was in French
– over countless drafts. They also made valuable suggestions regarding content
and presentation. To the others who are unnamed I am nonetheless grateful. All
remaining errors are mine alone.

Thanks to Omar for patience and support as I spent weekends and vacations
tethered to my MacBook. And thanks to Nuba and Devi for providing necessary
distractions.

Version 3.1

Since _Q for Mortals Version 3_ went to press we have revised the terminology
used in [code.kx.com](https://code.kx.com/) in order to follow common usage
more closely. _Monadic_ and _dyadic_ are now respectively _unary_ and _binary_
; _verbs_ are now _operators_ and _keywords_ ; and _adverbs_ are _iterators_.

This HTML edition is published by KX, by permission of the author. It has been
updated to follow KX’s revision of terminology, and linked to the online
[Reference](https://code.kx.com/q/ref/).

Please advise [librarian@kx.com](mailto:librarian@kx.com) of any errors in
this edition.

