https://code.kx.com/platform/pykx_integration/

# PyKX integration - KX Delta Platform

Original URL: https://code.kx.com/platform/pykx_integration/

# PyKX integration

KX Delta Platform 4.8.1 and later is integrated with PyKX. It offers the full
functionality of using Python in a q session as documented in
[code.kx.com](https://code.kx.com/pykx/2.3/pykx-under-q/intro.html)

Currently all Linux flavours supported by the KX Delta Platform support PyKX
integration. As part of the KX Delta Platform installation, the necessary
files for PyKX will be installed into the QHOME directory.

## KX Delta Platform PyKX dependencies

The dependencies for PyKX are listed in
[code.kx.com](https://code.kx.com/pykx/2.3/getting-
started/installing.html#supported-environments). During installation the KX
Delta Platform installer will attempt to detect your python version and pip
version to install the package. If either of these are not installed, the
installation will be skipped.

Users will require a `k4.lic` or `kc.lic` with the required feature flags
enabled to use PyKX features within KX Delta Platform. Attempting to use an
unlicensed version of PyKX will be blocked. For more information see
[prerequisites](https://code.kx.com/pykx/2.3/pykx-
under-q/intro.html#prerequisites).

## KX Delta Platform PyKX installation

PyKX will automatically be installed into KX Delta Platform upon upgrade to KX
Delta Platform 4.8.1 if all dependencies are met.

If the server is running multiple versions of python or pip, it will be
necessary to specify the alias used for the installation. This can be done by
adding the following to the [install config
profile](https://code.kx.com/platform/deployment/install_config/).

    
    
    python_executable=python3
    pip_executable=pip3.11
    

The installer will then check for these executables in the PATH.

The PyKX libraries will not be automatically loaded into q sessions on start
up. These can be initialized by running the command

    
    
    \l pykx.q
    

or by executing a python statement within a q session using the `p)` notation.

For any issues with installing or inititializing PyKX, please refer to our
[troubleshooter](link%20to%20troubleshooter)

## Upgrading from KX EmbedPy

The KX Delta Platform installer will detect if there is an existing
installation of KX EmbedPy. As there are significant syntax differences
between PyKX and EmbedPy, the installer will not automatically overwrite
EmbedPy with PyKX. Prior to upgrade it is important to understand the
differences listed in [Upgrading from
EmbedPy](https://code.kx.com/pykx/2.3/pykx-under-q/upgrade.html). Upgrading to
PyKX from EmbedPy is done by adding the following to the [install config
profile](https://code.kx.com/platform/deployment/install_config/).

    
    
    overwrite_embedpy=1
    

It is also possible to manually install from CLI by following the instructions
in [installation](https://code.kx.com/pykx/2.3/pykx-
under-q/intro.html#installation)

## PyKX KX Analyst integration

PyKX is fully integrated with the KX Analyst component of the KX Delta
Platform. This ensures you will be able to recognise python files and migrate
variables through the Analyst interface. Further information can be found in
[KX Analyst](https://code.kx.com/analyst/python/).

