https://code.kx.com/insights/enterprise/azure-marketplace/billing-faq.html

# Azure billing FAQs - kdb products

Original URL: https://code.kx.com/insights/enterprise/azure-marketplace/billing-faq.html

# Frequently asked questions

## How can I find my "Managed kdb Insights Enterprise License" SaaS
subscription?

There are multiple ways to navigate to your Managed kdb Insights Enterprise
License KX License subscription.

When you created the Managed kdb Insights Enterprise License subscription, you
entered a name and selected a resource group.

You can search for either of those:

  * Navigate to the Azure search box and enter the subscription name or the resource group name which you selected when you subscribed to the Managed kdb Insights Enterprise License.

  * If you do not know the name of your subscription or the name of the resource group, you can search for "SaaS" in the search box and select SaaS under Services. This shows all of your SaaS subscriptions in your tenant:

![Deployments](images/billing_azure_martketplace_find_subscription.png)

## Can I move my SaaS Billing resource to another Azure Subscription or
Resource Group?

Yes, you can move your SaaS billing resource to another Azure Subscription or
Resource group as long as it is funded by the same billing account.

To do so, navigate to your SaaS resource, click **Change Azure subscription**
or **Change resource group** and follow the instructions.

![Deployments](images/billing_azure_martketplace_change_subscription.png)

## Can I modify the recurring billing option after the subscription has been
created?

Yes, navigate to your SaaS resource, click **Edit recurring billing** and
follow the instructions.

![Deployments](images/billing_azure_martketplace_change_subscription.png)

### Can I purchase a kdb Insights Enterprise KX License with custom terms and
conditions or a custom price?

Yes, to have custom terms and conditions or custom price please contact
Support through the [KX Support
Portal](https://kxsupport.atlassian.net/servicedesk/customer/portal/15) or by
sending an email to [ims@kx.com](mailto:ims@kx.com).

Once you agree on custom terms and conditions with KX, then KX will create a
private offer for you. To do that you need to provide your Azure [Billing
Account Number](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cost-management-
billing/manage/view-all-accounts).

You can find your billing account number in Azure > Cost Management > Billing
Scopes > {Select your preferred scope} > Properties > ID field.

Once the private offer is ready KX will send you an activation link for your
private offer. It will contain the custom terms and conditions as well as the
price that you have agreed on with KX.

To accept a private offer, you need to have "Billing account contributor" or
"Billing account owner" [role on the Billing
Account](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cost-management-
billing/manage/understand-mca-roles#manage-billing-roles-in-the-azure-portal).

Warning

Please verify that you have this role as it cannot be inherited by other
roles. Even Global Administrators of an AD tenant will not have this role by
default.

Once accepted, you can view your private offer in Azure Marketplace under both
the private products and private offer management.

