https://code.kx.com/insights/enterprise/database/configuration/ui/stream.html

# Stream Settings - kdb products

Original URL: https://code.kx.com/insights/enterprise/database/configuration/ui/stream.html

# Streams

_This section describes the configuration options available under the**Stream
Settings** tab in the kdb Insights Enterprise UI._

A stream is the _kdb Insights Enterprise_ deployment of a [Reliable Transport
(or RT)](../../../../microservices/rt/index.html) cluster, and provides highly
available, high performance messaging. In _kdb Insights Enterprise_ , Streams
come in two forms, internal streams, which are required to process data
between kdb Insights components within a deployment, and external streams,
which connect an external data source to the database.

In _kdb Insights Enterprise_ , all data written to the database goes through
the primary stream. External streams can be connected to a [Stream
Processor](../../../ingest/pipeline/index.html) and transformed, or they can
be directly connected to the database.

## Managing streams

A single internal primary stream is created automatically when creating a new
database. Simply create a new database via the component tree and navigate to
the **Stream Settings** tab.

![Stream tab](images/ui/stream/streams-tab.png)

Through the Stream Settings tab you can:

### Process Name

By default, the primary stream is given the same name as the database within
which it resides.

  * Change the **Process Name** by clicking the edit icon and entering a new name. 
  * Enter a name that is globally unique across all streams in all databases. 
  * Use alpha numeric characters and dashes for name based data routing.

![Stream rename](images/ui/stream/stream-name.png)

Once the stream has been configured, click **Save** button to save the
settings.

## Additional stream

If you require an additional stream to ingest raw data that requires
transformation (via a pipeline) prior to ingestion into the database you can
deploy an additional stream with identical resource specifications as the
primary stream.

For example, a publishing client, such as a feedhandler, might send data in
CSV or JSON format which needs to be decoded and have a schema applied before
ingestion into the database.

To deploy an additional stream, enable **Create an additional stream process**
in the **Additional Stream** section.

![Additional stream](images/ui/stream/additional-stream.png)

When checked there is an additional checkbox in the **External Data Sources**
section, described below allowing this stream to be used by external sources.

## Managing external streams

You can choose to allow externally-facing ingress to a stream. This may be
required if you have data to be ingested into one of your streams (primary or
additional) from outside the kdb Insights cluster using an external publishing
client such as a feedhandler.

### Primary Stream

To allow ingestion of data from external sources to the primary stream
process:

  1. Enable **Ingest data from external sources directly to the database** in the **External Data Sources** section. 
  2. Once checked, an additional configuration section for the stream is displayed where you can specify the **External Reference** for the additional stream process. By default, the external reference is initialized as **database name**. See note on external reference below._*_ *

![External Data Sources](images/ui/stream/external-streams.png)

With this configured data sent from external sources to the primary stream is
read by the database without any transformations being applied, therefore the
data must be in a format the database can digest.

### Additional Stream

To allow ingestion of data from external sources to an additional stream
process:

  1. Enable **Create an additional stream process** in **Additional Stream** settings. 
  2. Enable **Ingest data from external sources directly to your additional stream** in the **External Data Sources** section. 
  3. Once checked, an additional configuration section for the stream is displayed where you can specify the **External Reference** for the additional stream process. By default, the external reference is initialized as **database name with a`-e` suffix.**. See note on external reference below.

![External Data Sources](images/ui/stream/external-stream2.png)

With this configured data sent from external sources to the additional stream
can be transformed (using a pipeline) prior to ingestion into the database.

### External reference

The **External Reference** set here and here is used as the **SDK_CLIENT_UID**
configuration value by external clients to reference the stream for publishing
from outside of the kdb Insights cluster.

The external reference may only contain lower case alphanumeric characters,
"-" or ".", and must start and end with an alphanumeric character.

