https://code.kx.com/dashboards/eula/

# No Fee, KX Dashboards Direct™ License Agreement | KX Dashboards - KX Dashboards

Original URL: https://code.kx.com/dashboards/eula/

# End-user no-fee KX Dashboards Direct™ license agreement

Carefully read the following terms and conditions.

By clicking _I accept_ or by installing, downloading or otherwise using the KX
Dashboards Direct™ software you are agreeing on your own behalf (“you”) and if
applicable, the entity you represent’s behalf (“Entity”) (both of which will
be deemed a “User”) that you both shall be bound by these terms and
conditions.

User warrants that the identification details that User provides to KX to
access the KX Dashboards Direct™ software including but not limited to name,
email address, location and organisation or entity information is true and
correct. User agrees that this agreement is enforceable like any written
agreement signed by user and legally binding between user and KX Systems, Inc.
If you use the software as an employee, contractor, or agent of a corporation,
partnership or similar entity, you represent and warrant that you have the
authority to bind the entity to license the software as a user.

If User does not agree to these terms and conditions, do not download the
software. User may not access the KX Dashboards Direct™ software if User is a
direct competitor of KX.

This Agreement is made between KX Systems, Inc. (“KX”) and the User with
respect to KX Dashboards Direct™ Software any updates, license keys, and/or
any documentation provided to User by KX (jointly, the “KX Dashboards Direct™
Software”). User agrees to use the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software under the
terms and conditions set forth below which shall be subject to change from
time to time.

## 1\. License grants

### 1.1 Grant of license

Subject to and conditional upon User’s strict compliance with this Agreement,
KX hereby grants User a limited, non-transferable, non-exclusive license,
without right of sublicense, during the term of this Agreement, to install the
KX Dashboards Direct™ Software on a hard disk or other permanent storage media
in executable code form and to use the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software
internally solely for the purpose of building software visualisation tools or
dashboards using the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software subject to the terms of
this Agreement. User may use the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software for internal
use only. For the avoidance of doubt, KX may revoke this license and/or
withdraw its consent at any time for User to use the KX Dashboards Direct™
Software. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as the grant of any
licence or other right to User, to or in respect of any Intellectual Property
or Confidential Information of KX except as expressly set forth herein.

### 1.2 KX Dashboards Direct™ Software use restrictions

(a) **Usage Restrictions.** User is not permitted under any circumstances to
use the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software for (a) the development of a
visualization tool(s) or dashboard(s), product or application which could be
deemed to have the same or substantially the same functionality as the KX
Dashboards Direct™ Software (b) repackaging of the KX Dashboards Direct™
Software (c) development of a visualization tool(s) or dashboard(s), or
product or application which could be deemed as competitive to the KX
Dashboards Direct™ Software (in whole or in part) (d) attempt to distribute or
host or make available to any third party any visualisation tool(s) or
dashboard(s), product or application which the User may develop which utilizes
in any manner the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software (e) research or development
of a visualization tool(s) or dashboard(s), product or application which
utilizes in any manner the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software now or in the future
for a commercial purpose or service. Furthermore, User may not attempt to or
use the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software with any database software other than
KX’s proprietary Kdb+ software.

(b) **Modifications to the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software.** User undertakes
that it will not allow or permit another individual or entity to have any
right to access or use the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software nor to use the KX
Dashboards Direct™ Software on its behalf; and, in the event of any such
unauthorized access or use, it shall promptly notify KX. User shall not and
shall not attempt to permit any third party to: (i) use the KX Dashboards
Direct™ Software beyond the scope of the license granted under Section 1.1, or
(ii) alter, modify, translate, mirror, adapt or frame the whole or any part of
the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software (even for the purposes of error correction)
or create derivative works (except as necessary to configure the menus,
options and tools provided for such purposes and contained in the KX
Dashboard’s Direct™ Software), or improvements whether or not patentable to
the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software or any documentation or (iii) display,
sell, rent, lease, loan, license, lend, assign, publish, transfer distribute
or otherwise make available all or any portion of the KX Dashboards Direct™
Software (in whole or in part), or any features or functionality of the KX
Dashboards Direct™ Software, and/or documentation (as applicable) in any form
or media or by any means to any third party for any reason, whether or not
over a network or on a hosted basis, including in connection with the internet
or any web hosting, wide area network (WAN), virtual private network (VPN),
virtualization, time-sharing, service bureau, software as a service, cloud, or
other technology or service, or (iv) attempt to decompile, decode, reverse
engineer or otherwise reduce to human-perceivable form all or any part of the
KX Dashboards Direct™ Software or attempt to gain access to the source code of
the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software or any part thereof, or (v) copy the KX
Dashboards Direct™ Software except for purposes of installing and executing it
on a single computer and for back up purposes, or (vi) use the KX Dashboards
Direct™ Software for more than a total of five (5) concurrent individual
users, or (vii) remove, delete, alter, or obscure any trademarks or any
copyright, trademark, patent, or other Intellectual Property or proprietary
rights notices provided on or with the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software or
documentation, including any copy thereof, or (viii) use unauthorized license
keys or distribute license key(s). KX Dashboards Direct™ Software is protected
by copyright and other intellectual property laws and international treaty
provisions which User agrees to safeguard as provided for under section 6,
Confidential Information, below. User further agrees it is responsible and
liable for all uses of the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software and documentation
provided to User by KX and is responsible and liable for all actions and
failures to take required actions with respect to the KX Dashboards Direct™
Software and documentation provided to User.

### 1.3 KX Dashboards Direct™ Software performance

User shall not distribute or otherwise make available to any third party any
report regarding the performance of the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software or any
report which contains a competitive analysis, KX Dashboards Direct™ Software
benchmarks or any information from such a report unless User receives the
express, prior written consent of KX to disseminate such report or
information.

### 1.4 Delivery and installation

User is responsible for downloading the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software from
the designated KX website. User is solely responsible for installing and
configuring the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software.

### 1.5 Number of instances and users

The KX Dashboards Direct™ Software is subject to instance and user
restrictions and is licensed to run on one instance for use by a maximum of
five (5) concurrent individual users.

### 1.6 Third-party software

The KX Dashboards Direct™ Software may contain or be provided with components
which are subject to the terms and conditions of "open source" software or
commercial licenses ("Third Party Software"). Each Third Party Software
module, library or package is licensed under the terms of its own license
agreement as specified in the applicable help, notices, about or source files.
Copyrights and other proprietary rights to the Third Party Software are held
by the copyright holders identified in the applicable help, notices, about or
source files. User must respect and adhere to the licensing terms of Third
Party Software.

### 1.7 Intellectual property ownership rights

User acknowledges and agrees that KX owns all rights, title and interest in
the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software and in all of KX’s Intellectual Property
relating to the design, manufacture and operation of the KX Dashboards Direct™
Software. (“Intellectual Property” means patents, utility models, rights to
inventions, copyright and related rights, trademarks and service marks, trade
names and domain names, rights in get-up, goodwill and the right to sue for
passing off or unfair competition, rights in designs, rights in computer
software, database rights, rights to preserve the confidentiality of
information (including know-how and trade secrets) and any other intellectual
property rights, including all applications for (and rights to apply for and
be granted), renewals or extensions of, and rights to claim priority from,
such rights and all similar or equivalent rights or forms of protection which
subsist or will subsist, now or in the future, in any part of the world.) The
use by User of such proprietary rights is authorized only for the purposes set
forth herein, and upon termination of this Agreement for any reason, such
authorization will cease. User acknowledges that the KX Dashboards Direct™
Software is proprietary and contains confidential and valuable trade secrets
of KX, which User agrees to safeguard as provided for under section 6,
Confidential Information, below. For the avoidance of doubt, User disclaims
all right, title and interest in the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software (whether
in whole or in part) that is licensed pursuant to the terms of this Agreement.
User irrevocably waives, to the extent permitted by applicable law, any and
all claims User may now or hereafter have in any jurisdiction to so-called
"moral rights." Such KX Dashboards Direct™ Software shall vest in and be owned
by KX absolutely and User shall not apply for or register any patents,
trademarks, trade names, inventions, copyrights, know-how or trade secrets
relating to the design, manufacture and operation of KX Dashboards Direct™
Software, or in relation to any visualization tool or dashboard, or product or
application developed by User if such visualization tool or dashboard, product
or application in any manner utilises the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software or if
any such application or registration includes any reference to or any aspect
of the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software (whether in whole or in part) or any KX
Confidential Information.

## 2\. No support or maintenance

The KX Dashboards Direct™ Software is licensed to User without any support
(consulting services) or maintenance (error corrections).

## 3\. Fees

The KX Dashboards Direct™ Software is licensed to the User without charge.

## 4\. No warranty

The KX Dashboards Direct™ software is provided “as is’. KX expressly disclaims
and negates all warranties for the KX Dashboards Direct™ software, whether
expressed, implied, statutory or otherwise, and KX specifically disclaims any
implied warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose,
noninfringement of intellectual property or other violation of rights. KX does
not warrant that the KX Dashboards Direct™ software will meet User
requirements or that the operation of the KX Dashboards Direct™ software will
be uninterrupted or error-free or free of harmful components.

## 5\. Limitation of liability

We do not exclude or limit in any way our liability to user where it would be
unlawful to do so. kx shall not be liable for any damages under or in
connection with this agreement. KX shall not be liable for any special,
incidental, consequential, indirect or other similar damages of any kind under
any cause or action whether in contract or tort (including negligence), in
connection with or arising out of the use of, or, inability to use the KX
Dashboards Direct™ software, even if KX has been advised of the possibility of
such damages. Such damages include, but are not limited to, loss of profits,
sales or revenue, business information, loss of or damage to goodwill, delay,
malfunction or inability to use the KX Dashboards Direct™ software loss
resulting from system or system service failure, loss of data, malfunction, or
shutdown; failure to accurately transfer, read, or transmit information;
failure to update or provide correct information; system incompatibility or
provision of incorrect compatibility information; or breaches in system
security. User hereby waives any right to bring any claim, including but not
limited to claims for losses or damages (including to the extent that such
losses or damages arise in connection with a third-party claim brought against
the User) in connection with the KX Dashboards Direct™ software licensed under
this agreement.

The parties agree that the limitations in this section 5 shall survive and
apply even if any limited remedy in this Agreement is found to have failed of
its essential purpose. The User acknowledges that it has not relied on any
representations made by KX in entering into or commencing any activity under
this Agreement.

## 6\. Confidential information

(a) As used in this Agreement, the term “Confidential Information” means (i)
information disclosed in writing by KX and marked confidential, (ii)
information disclosed orally by KX to User and summarized in writing and
marked confidential within thirty (30) days of such oral disclosure, and (iii)
the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software, license key files and documentation
including any Intellectual Property appurtenant thereto. User agrees that
during the term of this Agreement and for a period of five (5) years
thereafter, that it will treat as confidential all Confidential Information of
KX, will not use such Confidential Information except as expressly set forth
herein or otherwise authorized in writing, will implement reasonable
procedures to prohibit the disclosure, duplication, misuse or removal of KX’s
Confidential Information and will not disclose such Confidential Information
to any third party except as may be necessary and required in connection with
the rights and obligations of User permitted under this Agreement, and subject
to confidentiality obligations at least as protective as those set forth
herein. Without limiting the foregoing, User will use at least the same
procedures and degree of care that it uses to prevent the disclosure of its
own confidential information of like importance to prevent the disclosure of
Confidential Information disclosed to it by KX under this Agreement, but in no
event less than reasonable care.

(b) The foregoing restrictions will not apply to information that (i) is known
to User at the time of communication, (ii) has become publicly known through
no wrongful act of User, (iii) has been rightfully received from a third party
authorized to make such communication without restriction, (iv) has been
independently developed by the User (which can be evidenced with
contemporaneous records), (v) has been approved for release by written
authorization of KX, or (vi) is required by law to be disclosed; provided that
if User is required to disclose KX’s Confidential Information pursuant to an
order under law, User shall give KX sufficient notice of such disclosure to
allow KX reasonable opportunity to object to and take necessary legal action
to prevent such disclosure. User will not issue any press release or make any
other public communication with respect to this Agreement or its use of the KX
Dashboards Direct™ Software.

(c) User agrees not to disclose benchmark, test or performance information
regarding the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software. User agrees not to disclose
benchmark, test or performance information regarding the KX Dashboards Direct™
Software to any third party nor to distribute or otherwise make available to
any third party any report regarding the performance of the KX Dashboards
Direct™ Software except as explicitly authorized by KX in writing in advance.

## 7\. Term and termination of Agreement

(a) **Term**. This Agreement is effective as of the installation of the KX
Dashboards Direct™ Software and shall continue until the earlier of (i) the
period that the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software is set to function when
delivered to the User; or (ii) the beginning of the next calendar year; or
(iii) a modification to the terms of the Agreement pursuant to section 7.1 (d)
or (iv) termination of the Agreement by KX pursuant to section 7.1 (b). At the
beginning of each calendar year, the Agreement shall automatically renew for
an additional year, but subject to any revised terms which are downloaded or
made available pursuant to section 7.1 (d). KX may also at its discretion
terminate User’s access to the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software at any time and
KX shall have the right to automatically terminate this Agreement upon KX’s
written notice.

(b) **KX termination**. KX shall terminate this Agreement at any time at its
discretion without notice. Upon termination of this Agreement or at any time
upon KX’s written request, User shall destroy all copies of the KX Dashboards
Direct™ Software in his possession. User shall certify to KX that it has
complied with the foregoing requirements. The foregoing obligations apply to
copies of the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software in all forms, partial and
complete, in all types of media and computer memory, and whether or not
modified or combined with other materials.

(c) **Temporary suspension**. KX may suspend User’s right to access or use of
the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software if KX determines that User (i) poses a
security risk to KX or any third party, (ii) access or use could adversely
impact the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software, (iii) could subject KX or our
affiliates, or any third party to liability, or (iv) or their actions could be
fraudulent.

(d) **Amendments to the Agreement**. KX may amend this Agreement at any time.
This Agreement may be modified by one of the following events (i) the User
downloads a revised version of the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software with revised
license terms (ii) a representative or colleague from the Entity which you
represent downloads a revised version of the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software
with revised license terms (iii) User is notified by KX on their website or
via email of a change or update in the license terms. If an event described in
sub clauses (i) through to (iii) occurs, User acknowledges and agrees that by
continuing to use the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software, User agrees to be bound
by the revised terms from the date they are modified. User is solely
responsible for monitoring any changes to this Agreement. Absence of
notification does not relieve User of the obligation to monitor all changes to
the Agreement, or of such modifications’ enforceability.

## 8\. General

**8.1** User is not permitted to assign any of its rights nor delegate any of
its obligations under this Agreement to any third party without the express
written consent of KX. This prohibition extends to any reorganization or
merger of User or the sale of User’s business or its assets to a third party.

**8.2** User shall comply with all applicable laws, statutes, regulations and
codes relating to anti-bribery and anti-corruption including but not limited
to the Bribery Act 2010 and the US Foreign Corrupt Practices Act 1977.

**8.3** This Agreement and all related documents and all matters arising out
of or relating to this Agreement whether in contract, tort, or statute shall
be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of New
York, United States of America, except as to copyright matters covered by U.S.
Federal law. This Agreement is deemed entered into at New York by both
parties. Each party irrevocably and unconditionally agrees to the exclusive
jurisdiction of the State of New York and it will not commence any action,
litigation, or proceeding of any kind whatsoever against any other party in
any way arising from or relating to this Agreement and all contemplated
transactions, including, but not limited to, contract, equity, tort, fraud,
and statutory claims, in any forum other than the State of New York (except as
permitted by KX as detailed below). User hereby waives any objections to venue
in those courts. Each party agrees that a final judgment in any such action,
litigation, or proceeding is conclusive and may be enforced in other
jurisdictions by suit on the judgment or in any other manner provided by law.
Should any provision of this Agreement be declared unenforceable in any
jurisdiction, then such provision shall be deemed to be severed from this
Agreement and shall not affect the remainder hereof. Furthermore, with respect
to a violation by User of the provisions of section 1 relating to this
Agreement, or for actions for injunctive relief to protect KX Confidential
Information, KX will have the right at its discretion to seek remedies in
courts of competent jurisdiction within any applicable territory. The United
Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods and the
Uniform Computer information Transactions Act, as currently enacted by any
jurisdiction or as may be codified or amended from time to time by any
jurisdiction, do not apply to this Agreement.

**8.4** The KX Dashboards Direct™ Software including any software,
documentation, and any related technical data included with, or contained in,
such KX Dashboards Direct™ Software and any products utilizing any such KX
Dashboards Direct™ Software, documentation, or technical data (collectively,
"Regulated Software") may be subject to export control and economic sanctions
laws, regulations and requirements and to import laws, regulations and
requirements of certain foreign governments including but not limited to US
export control laws and regulations, including the Export Administration
Regulations and the International Traffic in Arms Regulations. User shall not,
and shall not permit any third parties to, directly or indirectly, export,
reexport, or release any Regulated Software to any jurisdiction or country to
which, or any party to whom, the export, reexport, or release of any Regulated
Software is prohibited by applicable federal or foreign law, regulation, or
rule. User accepts and agrees that a) it will not use the Regulated Software
for the development, design, manufacture or production of nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons of mass destruction; b) User is not located in Cuba, Iran,
Sudan, Iraq, North Korea, Syria, nor any other country to which the United
States has prohibited export or that has been designated by the U.S Government
as a ‘terrorist supporting’ country (“US Embargoed Country”) c) User is not a
citizen, national or resident of and is not under the control of a US
Embargoed Country; d) User will not attempt to and will not download or
otherwise export for re-export the Regulated Software e) User is not listed on
the United States Department of Treasury list of Specially Designated
Nationals, Specially Designated Terrorists and Specially Designated Narcotic
Traffickers. User shall not, and shall not permit any third parties to,
directly or indirectly, export, reexport, or release any Regulated Software to
any jurisdiction or country to which, or any party to whom, the export,
reexport, or release of any Regulated Software is prohibited by applicable
federal or foreign law, regulation, or rule. For clarity, User is solely
responsible for compliance in using and accessing the KX Dashboards Direct™
Software and the compliance in the region in which any of the foregoing
occurs. User shall be responsible for any breach of this section 8.4 by its,
and its successors' and permitted assigns', parent, affiliates, employees,
officers, directors, customers, agents, distributors, resellers, or vendors.

**8.5** KX shall be permitted to audit pertinent records and computers of User
and where applicable attend User’s facilities for the purpose of conducting
inspections of your records and computers in order to confirm your compliance
with the terms of this Agreement.

**8.6** User and the organisation which User represents and has bound to the
terms of this Agreement shall be jointly and severally liable for User’s
obligations under this Agreement.

**8.7** This Agreement is the complete and exclusive statement of the mutual
understanding of the parties and supersedes all prior or contemporaneous
representations, negotiations, or other communications between the parties
relating to the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
if User has entered into a separate software license agreement with First
Derivatives plc or KX for use of the “KX for Dashboards” software, that
software license agreement remains in full force and effect and its terms
shall prevail over any conflicting terms of this Agreement.

**8.8** The waiver by either party of a breach or right under this Agreement
will not constitute a waiver of any other or subsequent breach or right.

**8.9** The parties to this Agreement do not intend that any term of this
Agreement will be enforceable by any third party or person who is not a party
to this Agreement.

**8.10** Non-performance of either party shall be excused to the extent that
performance is rendered impossible by strike, fire, flood, governmental acts,
order or restrictions, failure of suppliers, or any other reason where failure
to perform is beyond the control and not caused by the negligence of the non-
performing party.

**8.11** KX will not access or use the information User provide to us except
as necessary to provide User with access to the KX Dashboard’s Direct™
Software, provide administration services, verify User compliance with the
terms of this Agreement, and/or to enforce KX’s rights, including all
Intellectual Property rights in and to the Dashboards Direct™ Software or as
necessary to comply with the law or a binding order of a governmental body. We
will only use User’s information in accordance with our privacy policy.

**8.12** User agrees that the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software is “commercial
computer software” and/or “commercial computer software documentation”
pursuant to DFAR Section 227.7202 and FAR Section 12.212, as applicable, and
any use, modification, reproduction, release, performance, display, or
disclosure of the KX Dashboards Direct™ Software by a U.S. government agency
shall be prohibited except as expressly permitted by this Agreement, which
terms shall govern.

**8.13** The provisions of section 1.3 (“KX Dashboards Direct™ Software
Performance”) section 1.7 (“Intellectual Property Ownership Rights”), section
4 (“No Warranty”), section 5 (“Limitation of Liability”), section 6
(“Confidential Information”), section 7 (“Term and Termination”) and Section 8
(“General”) shall survive the termination of this Agreement for any reason.
All other rights and obligations of the parties shall cease upon termination
of this Agreement.

