https://code.kx.com/insights/accelerators/fsi/ice-fi-introduction.html

# ICE Fixed Income FI Screener Overview - kdb products

Original URL: https://code.kx.com/insights/accelerators/fsi/ice-fi-introduction.html

# KX Fixed Income Bond Screener for ICE® Data Accelerator Overview

## Introduction

The KX Fixed Income Bond Screener Accelerator ingests realtime, historic, and
reference data from ICE® (The Intercontinental Exchange, Inc.®) Fixed Income
and Data Services and persists them in kdb Insights Enterprise. Tick-level
data can be streamed directly into custom Realtime streaming analytic
pipelines, queried using SQL, or analyzed using enhanced Accelerator APIs via
Python or any downstream application using REST.

The entire Accelerator can be configured and launched on an existing kdb IE
installation in minutes. Quants, business users, and developers can get
instant access to high quality ICE data, paired with the power and performance
of kdb Insights Enterprise, all without a lengthy implementation project.

kdb Insights Enterprise with KX Fixed Income Bond Screener Accelerator can
power use cases such as:

  * **Portfolio construction** – Narrow down on bonds to incorporate into a portfolio. Simple filters are demonstrated in the Accelerator, but the approach can be used to build out more complex analyses incorporating a full range of aggregated and tick level data.
  * **Backtesting** – Faster historical data ingest, enabling quicker algorithm development iteration

### Accelerator architecture

The KX Accelerator delivers a scalable, performant architecture including:

  * The ICE Realtime Feed Handler
  * A pipeline for realtime Quote data ingest `icerealtimefi`
  * A pipeline for replay (historical) Quote data ingest `icehistoricreplayfixedincome`
  * A pipeline COREREF and CROSSREF data ingest `icecorereference` and `icecrossreference`
  * A pipeline for APEX GSM data (ratings and sector information) `iceratings`
  * Schemas for `Quote` and `Instrument` data for the above
  * Analytic and query APIs via the [FSI Library](fsi-lib-overview.html)
  * Two example Insights Views that combine realtime, historic, and reference data
    * An overview screen 
    * A drilldown screen 
  * Example Jupyter notebooks, demonstrating Python and REST API access

![ICE FI Screener Accelerator Architecture](images/kdbie-accel-fi-
screener.png)

### Further detail

For more information, refer to the following documentation:

## About ICE®

[ICE](https://www.ice.com/) is a Fortune 500 company that designs, builds, and
operates digital networks that combine data, technology, and expertise to
connect people to opportunity. They operate exchanges, including the New York
Stock Exchange, clearing houses, and mortgage technology that help people
invest, raise capital and manage risk across asset classes. By aligning global
price discovery data, comprehensive reference, alternative data, events data
(corporate actions), analytics and benchmark solutions with proprietary fixed
income & OTC capabilities, ICE is uniquely positioned to support the
investment community. In addition to continuous investments in technology,
what sets ICE apart is the human capital investment of professionals to
monitor both liquid and illiquid markets.

