https://code.kx.com/insights/enterprise/azure-marketplace/billing-private-offer.html

# Azure billing - kdb products

Original URL: https://code.kx.com/insights/enterprise/azure-marketplace/billing-private-offer.html

# Azure billing private offer

Through the marketplace you can purchase solutions with customized terms and
conditions, negotiated pricing and special configurations using [Private
offers](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/marketplace/private-offers-in-azure-
marketplace) created for you by KX.

## Pre-requisites

If you have agreed on custom terms and conditions with KX the following pre-
requisites need to be satisfied before KX can create a private offer for you.

  1. You need to ensure your Azure tenant can accept private offers. To do this you can run a [pre-check](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/marketplace/private-offers-pre-check) on your Azure tenant.

Pre-check private offer eligibility

This pre-check should be performed by the person purchasing or subscribing to
the offer and ability to sign into the account with access to the subscription
intended for purchase. The pre-check may fail with a variety of
[reasons](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/marketplace/private-offers-pre-
check#step-2-view-results-summary). Those may need to be resolved by your
Azure tenant administrator before the private offer can be set up.

See the [docs](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/marketplace/private-offers-
in-azure-marketplace#step-1-check-account-and-subscription-settings)

  2. The person accepting the private offer and the person purchasing the private offer need to have sufficient permissions.

See this [docs](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/marketplace/private-offers-
in-azure-marketplace#step-2-check-permissions) for details.

  3. Provide your [Azure Billing Account Number](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cost-management-billing/manage/view-all-accounts).

You can [find your billing account number in the Azure
portal](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/marketplace/find-billing-account-id)
by selecting **Cost Management > Billing Scopes > {Scope} > Properties > ID
field**. Where {Scope} is your preferred scope for this plan.

Once the private offer is ready, KX will send you an activation link for your
private offer to the Billing Account Contributor/Owner at your company. This
link will include the custom terms and conditions as well as the price that
you have agreed on with KX.

## Accepting your private offer

A private offer must be accepted before it can be purchased. Accepting a
private offer will make the Azure subscriptions, that are using the billing
profile shared with KX previously, eligible for the offer.

Acceptance requires a specific set of permissions

To accept a private offer, you need to have the "Billing account contributor"
or "Billing account owner" [role on the Billing
Account](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cost-management-
billing/manage/understand-mca-roles).

Activation permissions are different to those required for purchase and it is
usually performed by a different person in an organization than purchase.

To accept the offer open the activation link, review and accept your private
offer:

![Accept Private Offer](images/private-offer-accept.png)

Cost of activation

There are no costs associated with this activation step.

## Purchase your private offer

Once accepted, the page will automatically redirect you to the private offer
management page:

![Private Offer Management](images/private-offer-management.png)

To navigate here later you can:

  1. Go to Azure portal.
  2. Search and click **marketplace** in the search bar on the top.
  3. Select **Private Offer Management** on the left and your accepted private offer will be available.

  1. Click **Purchase**. This will open a standard Azure deployment page on the left:

![Private Offer Purchase](images/private-offer-purchase.png)

  2. Select the subscription and resource group where the SaaS resource will be created. You will be able to manage it later in that resource group.

  3. Give it a name. This will help you to find it later, if required.

  4. Please make sure to set the **Recurring billing** selector to **Off** , unless you want to make the purchase automatically again at the end of the billing period.â€‹

  5. Click **Review + subscribe**.

Ensure the price and term matches your private offer.

We have seen cases when it takes some time for Microsoft to update it
correctly.

## Configure SaaS Account

After you have subscribed to the Billing offer you need to configure the
account. This is done in the KX landing page, which can be accessed by either:

  * Clicking **Configure account now** displayed after you clicked **Review + subscribe**.

![Configure Account Now](images/private-offer-configure-account-now.png)

  * Navigate to the resource group, where the SaaS resource has been created. Open the SaaS resource and click **Configure account now** which will redirect you to the KX landing page.

### Grant consent to KX Landing Page

When you sign in to the KX landing page for the first time, you are required
to consent to the application accessing user data ([User.Read
scope](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/graph/permissions-reference#user-
permissions)). Approving this allows the application to identify you.

![Grant Consent](images/billing_azure_martketplace_consent_1.png)

#### Admin consent to KX Landing Page

By default, any user can consent to this scope, but the permissions required
to consent will depend on your Azure Tenant Policies. In some cases, only an
Admin user has the appropriate access.

![Grant Admin Consent](images/billing_azure_martketplace_consent.png)

If admin rights are required to consent, you will need to reach out to a
person with one of the following roles: [Global Administrator, Cloud
Application Administrator, Application
Administrator](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-
directory/manage-apps/review-admin-consent-requests#prerequisites)

An administrator can either:

### Activate License

Once you navigate to the landing page, you will need to fill in your contact
details - most will be pre-populated and all fields are required.

![Activate Account](images/billing_azure_martketplace_activate_account.png)

  1. Click on **View License Details** and review your details.

![License
Details](images/billing_azure_martketplace_activate_license_details.png)

  2. Click **Activate License**. If you navigated to the landing page directly, you can see your license under KX Licenses. You can activate it by clicking **Activate** on the Action menu.

  3. Once the Activation has been acknowledged the webpage will inform you that the request is being processed and direct you to the Subscriptions List where you can see the status of your license subscriptions.

![License Activated](images/billing_azure_martketplace_activated_account.png)

You can also check on the SaaS resource if it is successfully subscribed by
navigating to the previously created SaaS resource on Azure.

![SaaS Status](images/billing-saas.png)

