https://code.kx.com/platform/sc_support/

# Framework support - KX Delta Platform

Original URL: https://code.kx.com/platform/sc_support/

# Framework support

As of the _4.4.0_ release, not all frameworks and components support service
classes model. The main focus for this release was the data warehouse
components in _KX Stream_ and ensuring solutions can be built using service
classes to auto-scale.

## Query frameworks

New services will automatically register with the query frameworks and be
available for clients. Clients should target the service class name when
register their request or subscription and the process will be chosen
according to the service class cluster mode.

Service classes will be available in the _KX Dashboards_ as a connection group
and also when defining analytic metadata through the _Control UI_.

![Screenshot](../img/control/sc_dashboards.png)

![Screenshot](../img/control/sc_analyticmeta.png)

## Messaging

Service classes configured to use messaging will be able to register their
publish and subscribe topics as normal. There are no special considerations to
be aware of.

Runtime overrides

If running multiple services from the same service class, be aware that you
may share the same topics with another process. Use runtime overrides, if you
need to distinguish between messaging streams.

    
    
    # B service with different topics
    ./startService.sh -i fx_rdb -n fx_rdb_b -a "-publishChannel fx_pub_b -subscriptionChannel fx_sub_b"
    

## Data warehouse

Building a service-based data warehouse with _KX Stream_ is possible. The core
components can all run as services and scale; _TPs_ , _RDBs_ , _HDBs_ ,
_RTEs_.

The main caveat is around _EOD_. The _RDB_ template uses instances to find the
HDB on-disk location and the processes to reload. It doesn't support using a
service class and auto-discovering the running services. For this reason, the
_LR_ intraday write down approach must be used. The _LR_ template has been
modified to support services for _RDBs_ , _HDBs_ and _IHDBs_. Three new
parameters have been added to the template as seen below.

It will auto-discover services for each of these classes as they come online
and will take actions, i.e. flushing data from _RDBs_ and reloading _HDBs_.

![Screenshot](../img/control/sc_lr.png)

## Further support

Support is planned for expanding some of the other frameworks to run as
service but as of the _4.4.0_ release, these are not yet implemented. These
components still run as instances, including;

  * Messaging server
  * QR
  * QP
  * Action tracker
  * Report generator

The _Gateway (DS_GW)_ template does not support connecting to service classes
and there are no plans to implement at this point.

