https://code.kx.com/insights/enterprise/azure-marketplace/transact-only-offer.html

# kdb Insights or kdb Insights Enterprise License Offer - kdb products

Original URL: https://code.kx.com/insights/enterprise/azure-marketplace/transact-only-offer.html

# kdb Insights or kdb Insights Enterprise License

You can purchase kdb Insights or kdb Insights Enterprise for use on Azure, via
the Marketplace. To do this you must create and configure your account on our
transactable SaaS billing offer named: [kdb Insights or kdb Insights
Enterprise License](https://azuremarketplace.microsoft.com/en-
us/marketplace/apps/firstderivativesplc1596469572732.kx-insights-license-
billing?tab=Overview). You will be provided access to the license and software
so that you can provision the infrastructure and install the application on
Azure yourself.

Note

You will see in your invoices that this offer is billed for the agreed KX
License amount. This allows you to create your kdb Insights or kdb Insights
Enterprise instance whenever you want and we will still be able to generate KX
License bills through this offer.

Our offer is MACC (Microsoft Azure Consumption Commitment) eligible, meaning
it will contribute to your [Azure consumption commitment
benefit](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/marketplace/azure-consumption-
commitment-benefit).

## Create license only billing offer

In the following steps you will create the license only billing offer.

  1. Go to `Azure Marketplace`.
  2. Search for `kdb Insights or Insights Enterprise License`. Click on the offer.

![Marketplace offer](images/liconly_azure_marketplace_search.png)

  3. Read the Overview, Plans + Pricing and Usage Information + Support page. You can also come back here to provide a rating if you would like to.

  4. Select your plan and click `Subscribe`.

![Marketplace plan](images/liconly_azure_marketplace_select_plan.png)

  5. Select the `azure subscription` and `resource group` where the billing offer should be stored.

![Marketplace plan creation](images/liconly_azure_marketplace_creation.png)

     * The name of the license only billing offer can be anything. However, since this offer is used to bill a `kdb Insights or kdb Insights Enterprise instance` we recommend naming your offer something that resembles the name of the product.
  6. Select your preferred `Billing term` and `Price + payment frequency` if you have multiple options available.

  7. Select `Recurring Billing` if you want to auto-renew your offer once the `Billing term` has expired.
  8. Go to Tags. Configure tags as needed based on your policies.
  9. Go to Review + Subscribe. Review your offer then click `Subscribe`.

## Configure your account

Once you have created your billing offer, configure your `Account`.

Warning

You must complete the following process in 30 days, otherwise the offer will
be deleted.

### Navigate to the landing page

First, navigate to the Client Landing Page of KX.

There are multiple options to do this:

#### \- Option 1:

When the Billing offer is created, if you click `Configure account now` you
will be taken to the landing page.

![Navigate to the landing page
1](images/liconly_azure_marketplace_configure_account_now_1.png)

#### \- Option 2:

Go to your Billing offer on Azure and click `Configure account now` or `Open
SaaS Account on publisher's site` if the account is already configured.

![Navigate to the landing page
2](images/liconly_azure_marketplace_configure_account_now_2.png)

### Grant consent to KX Landing Page

When you sign in on our landing page for the first time, our application will
require consent to access user data ([User.Read
scope](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/graph/permissions-reference#user-
permissions)). Approving it allows us to identify you.

![Grant Consent](images/billing_azure_martketplace_consent_1.png)

### Admin consent to KX Landing Page

By default, any user can consent to this scope, but the permissions required
to consent will depend on your Azure Tenant Policies. In some cases, only an
Admin user has the appropriate access:

![Grant Admin Consent](images/billing_azure_martketplace_consent.png)

If admin rights are required to consent, you will need to reach out to a
person with one of the following roles: [Global Administrator, Cloud
Application Administrator, Application
Administrator](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-
directory/manage-apps/review-admin-consent-requests#prerequisites)

An administrator can either:

  1. [Allow users to consent for apps from verified publishers](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/manage-apps/configure-user-consent?pivots=portal) and mark User.Read scope to be [low impact](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/manage-apps/configure-permission-classifications?tabs=azure-portal#manage-permission-classifications)
  2. Configure [admin consent workflow](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/manage-apps/configure-admin-consent-workflow)
  3. Grant [tenant-wide admin consent](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/manage-apps/grant-admin-consent?pivots=portal)
  4. Grant consent [on behalf of a user](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/manage-apps/grant-consent-single-user?pivots=msgraph-powershell)

### KX license subscription

  1. Navigate to the landing page by clicking `Configure Account Now`. This redirects you to your KX License Details page.
  2. Fill in your contact details, most will be pre-populated and all fields are required.

![Activate Account](images/liconly_azure_marketplace_activate_account.png)

  1. Click on **View License Details** and review your details

![License
Details](images/billing_azure_martketplace_activate_license_details.png)

  2. Click `Activate License`

  3. Once the Activation has been acknowledged the webpage will inform you that the request is being processed and KX will contact you with download credentials and license details.

