https://code.kx.com/developer/exporter/

# Exporter - KX Developer

Original URL: https://code.kx.com/developer/exporter/

# Exporter

The Exporter provides an interface for moving data out of the system. Data can
be persisted to disk in a kdb+ format or can be exported to another format
altogether.

## Source

Select the data that needs to be exported. If the table to be exported is
loaded in memory, then select it from the table list.

![](../img/exporter/source.png)

## Output

Output selection is very similar to that of the table Importer.

Select the desired output format from the _Output Format_ dropdown. Once the
format has been selected, the options area will be populated with the required
settings for that format.

All of the required fields must be completed before selecting _Finish_.

### CSV â€“ delimited value

Delimited value files can store simple normalized tables into a text format
which can be be used to simply move data around. To export the data, select a
location on disk, name the output file and select a delimiter. This will
produce a file with the contents of the table in a text format using the
provided delimiter. Selecting the _Download_ option will download the output
table to the user's local machine.

Nested or complex data

If a table contains nested data or complex data, it cannot be serialized into
CSV format.

![](../img/exporter/csv.png)

#### Options

field | description  
---|---  
Delimiter | The delimiter character for the file. An option can be selected from the drop down or a custom character can be put in the adjacent text field.  
  
### JSON - JavaScript object notation

JSON is a popular structured text format that can be used to store a table as
an array of objects. To export data in this format, enter a file path and file
name for the output file and press _Next_. JSON can be used to represent much
more complex data than but will produce much larger output files due to its
syntax.

![](../img/exporter/json.png)

### KDB - kdb+ database

The Exporter can be used to write data back to disk as a kdb+ table. This will
write the data in one of the available table formats on disk.

![](../img/exporter/kdb.png)

If the _Download_ option is selected, only _Serialized_ will be available in
the _Table Format_ dropdown. This is single file database structure for kdb+
tables.

![](../img/exporter/kdb-download.png)

Partitioned database selection has an extra field for selecting the _Partition
Column_. This column will be used to separate the data into partitions. A
restriction of kdb+ is that the type of this column must be either a `date`,
`month`, `long`, `int` or `short`. The column selected will be renamed by kdb+
when loaded back into the process to one of `date`, `month`, `year` or `int`.

![](../img/exporter/kdb-partitioned.png)

