https://code.kx.com/phrases/intro/

# Introduction - Q Phrasebook

Original URL: https://code.kx.com/phrases/intro/

[ ](https://github.com/kxcontrib/phrases/edit/master/docs/intro.md "Edit this
page")

#  Q Phrasebook

The phrasebook is a collection of q expressions used for common tasks.

Because q is a terse language, the phrasebook is a particularly useful tool
for programmers. This collection of q expressions solves common problems and
serves both as a library for coders and a set of problems for those learning
the language.

## Repository

This is an open-source collection, and a repository of community programming
knowledge.

You can contribute to the project at
[kxcontrib/phrases](https://github.com/kxcontrib/phrases/). Or write to
[librarian@kx.com](mailto:librarian@kx.com).

## Genealogy

The q phrases derive originally from the [FinnAPL Idiom
Library](https://aplwiki.com/wiki/FinnAPL_idiom_library), a legendary resource
for vector programmers.

Iverson’s reboot of APL was the [J programming
language](https://jsoftware.com/), where the idioms became
[phrases](https://code.jsoftware.com/wiki/Phrases).

[Eugene McDonnell](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eugene_McDonnell) ported the
FinnAPL Idiom Library to the [k
language](https://code.kx.com/q/basics/exposed-infrastructure/#the-k-
programming-language). A partial translation of that into q was hosted – as an
extraordinarily long page – on the old wiki.

[Kdb+ and the history of the Q Phrasebook](https://kx.com/blog/kdb-and-the-
history-of-the-q-phrasebook/)

The k idiom list and its partial translation as the QIdioms page were
exercises by experienced programmers who at the time were getting to know the
respective languages.

The Q Phrasebook aims to fulfill their project of producing a q equivalent of
the FinnAPL Idiom Library and the J Phrases.

Many of the original problems have the same solution in q. The numbering
inherited from the ancestor lists has not been preserved. The phrases have
been renumbered. The [index to QIdioms](../index2/) maps old to new numbers.

## Paint the town red

The meaning of an idiom is given by customary usage. It cannot be understood
by analyzing the words in it.

For example, someone who _paints the town red_ might not use paint of any
color; but just goes out for a good time.

The Q Phrases are not idioms. They can be understood by analysis, and reward
study. So _phrases_ , not _idioms_.

## That’s a phrase?

Some of the ‘phrases’ turn out to be just q operators or keywords. For
example, [_Case structure_](../exec/#case-structure) is nothing but the [Cond
operator](https://code.kx.com/q/ref/cond/ "Reference").

They are included here because, although they are elementary in q, readers
coming from verbose languages might reasonably expect them to be at least a
phrase.

##  `phrases.q`

Some forms, such as `til count` recur so frequently they have been included in
the script [`phrases.q`](../phrases/) and used as parts of other phrases.

