https://code.kx.com/platform/deployment/single_node_deploy/

# Single node deploy - KX Delta Platform

Original URL: https://code.kx.com/platform/deployment/single_node_deploy/

# Single node deploy

This section details how to deploy the _KX Delta Platform_ on a non-clustered
single node deploy on a Linux or Windows host.

## Single server deploy - Linux

Once the bundle has been copied, unpacked and the licenses are in place itâ€™s
time to run the installer as follows:

    
    
    $ cd Platform-4.4.1-Linux
    $ ./install.sh
    

**Deploy Location**

The script will print to the terminal. The first prompt will be for the
location of the deployment. The default is `$USER/kxinstall`. Pressing the
enter key will accept the default location, to overwrite this enter an
alternative location.

    
    
    =============================================================
    ==                  install.sh [2.1.6]                     ==
    =============================================================
     KX Delta Platform install directory [/home/kxplatform/kxinstall]:
    

Before the deploy configuration continues a pre deploy script called
checkHost.sh will be run. The script will collect information about the deploy
host. If the host is not configured correctly or if there are missing
dependencies i.e. Java is not installed then the deploy will fail.

**Note** : You can disable the pre deploy check by running `install.sh` with
the `-h` flag as follows:

    
    
    =============================================================
    ==                  install.sh [2.1.6]                     ==
    =============================================================
     Skip Host Check
     KX Delta Platform install directory [/home/kxplatform/kxinstall]:
    

**Deploy Mode**

Select Mode 1 (Single host deploy)

    
    
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
     Running Pre Deploy Script [checkHost.sh]
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
     [1] Single
     [2] Control
     [3] Web Server
     [4] Daemon
     [5] Control + Web Server
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
     Select Node Type [1-5]: 1
    

**Note** : For more information on Deploy modes, see
[here](../install_scripts/#installsh-deploy-modes)

**Control Port**

The script will prompt for a free port to be used by the Control process. The
default port is 2001, press enter to accept the default port or enter a new
value.

**_Default Port_**

    
    
     Configuring Single Node Deploy:
      Please enter free port to be used by Control [2001]:
      Using port [2001] for Control
    

**_Custom Port_**

    
    
     Configuring Single Node Deploy:
      Please enter free port to be used by Control [2001]: 2500
      Using port [2500] for Control
    

**_Port in use_**

The installer will check that the port selected is not already in use. If it
is, you will be required to select an alternative port.

    
    
     Configuring Single Node Deploy:
      Please enter free port to be used by Control [2001]: 2500
      Port [2500] in use
      Please enter free port to be used by Control [2001]:
    

**KX Delta Platform CPU Cores**

At this point you may be prompted to enter the number of CPU cores you wish to
use for your _KX Delta Platform_ Deploy. This depends 2 factors, the number of
cores on the box (see Max: value below) and the number of cores your kdb+
License (k4.lic) supports. In the example below we are installing on a 12 CPU
Core host but the kdb+ license file only covers the use of 5 cores.

    
    
      Number of [Licensed KDB+] [CPU cores] [Max: 12]: 5
    

**Web Server Configuration**

In a single node deploy the Webserver runs on the same node as the KX Control
process. The Webserver can be deployed with either HTTP connector (only) or
HTTP/HTTPS connectors.

**_HTTP_**

To deploy with HTTP connector only select [1] HTTP below:

    
    
     [1] HTTP
     [2] HTTPS
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
     Select App Server Deploy Type [1-2]: 1
    

Enter the port to use for the HTTP connector (Default is port 8080)

    
    
    App Server HTTP port [8080]:
    

**_HTTP/HTTPS_**

To deploy with HTTP and HTTPS connectors select [2] HTTPS below:

    
    
     [1] HTTP
     [2] HTTPS
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
     Select App Server Deploy Type [1-2]: 2
    

HTTPS connector requires a Java Keystore which stores a SSL certificate under
the alias tomcat. The script prompts for the Keystore location and password.

    
    
     Tomcat Java Keystore [/home/kxplatform/.keystore]: /home/kxplatform/.keystore
     Tomcat Java Keystore Password [changeit]: mypass
    

The ports for the HTTPS and HTTP connectors are configured next. The HTTP
connector is configured to redirect to the HTTPS connector.

    
    
     App Server HTTPS port [8443]: 8443
     App Server HTTP port [8080]: 8080
    

**Process Configuration**

The next prompt is for the global port value which defines a starting point
for all port based config parameters in the delta.profile and
delta.instance.profile excluding the KX Control Port, Webserver HTTP and HTTPS
ports which are defined above.

    
    
     Please enter starting value for deploy port range [3000]: 3000
     Using starting port [3000]
    

**TLS Encryption**

If the bundle release version supports TLS Encryption you will be prompted
here to enable it. TLS configuration is dealt with [here](../tls_overview/).
For this example we will proceed without encryption:

    
    
     Encryption
      Deploy with TLS/SSL Encryption Enabled [no]:
    

**Deploy Packages**

The installer will now deploy the _KX Delta Platform_ packages and perform the
package import into _KX Control_ once completed. You should see the following
progress indicator:

    
    
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
     Running Deploy
     Installing [12] Packages
     [***********  ]
    

Once completed you should see the following

    
    
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
     [Tue 12 Nov 15:23:07 UTC 2019]
    Installation complete.
    

**Environment Start-up**

Once deployment is complete the bundle installer will bring up the system. On
successful installation you will see the following:

    
    
     KX Delta Platform Start-up
     [kxuser@kxplatform.firstderivatives.com]
     [Tue 12 Nov 15:23:07 UTC 2019]
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
     Starting Control                                  .....done
     Starting Daemon                                   .....done
     Starting App Server                               .....done
     Starting Workflow [DS_launch_MS_A]                .....done
     Starting Workflow [DS_launch_ALERT_A]             .....done
     Starting Workflow [DS_launch_OPS_A]               .....done
     Starting Workflow [DS_launch_REPORT_A]            .....done
     Starting Workflow [DS_launch_AT_A]                .....done
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
     Control:
       [https://kxplatform.firstderivatives.com:8443/control]
     Dashboards:
       [https://kxplatform.firstderivatives.com:8443/dashboards]
     Analyst:
       [https://kxplatform.firstderivatives.com:8443/analyst]
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
     Finished.
    

### Post deploy

Once the deploy has completed the post deploy env script called checkEnv.sh
will be run which will create a TGZ file with details of the deploy. The TGZ
can be found inside the bundle directory and it will be named something like
**KX-INSTALL-LOGS-20180117-103731.tgz**.

If you deploy with TLS Enabled an additional validation script called
validateCerts.sh will be run. The output from this and the checkEnv.sh script
will be printed to the screen see below:

    
    
    [checkEnv.log]
    +----------------------------------------------------------+
    Create Output Dirs
    +----------------------------------------------------------+
    Create dir [platform-info/kxplatform/env-info]
    +----------------------------------------------------------+
    Getting Process Details
    +----------------------------------------------------------+
    [netstat -antp]
    [ps -efwww]
    +----------------------------------------------------------+
    Copy Deploy Configuration
    +----------------------------------------------------------+
    Copy scripts [delta-bin/bin]
    Copy profile [delta.profile]
    Copy profile [delta.instance.profile]
    Copy profile [delta_user.profile]
    Copy config  [failover.csv]
    Copy config  [${TOMCAT_HOME}/latest/conf]
    +----------------------------------------------------------+
    Copy Deploy Logs
    +----------------------------------------------------------+
    Tomcat logs  [delta-bin/software/Tomcat_9_0_19/latest/logs]
    Process logs [delta-data/DeltaControlData/logdir]
    +----------------------------------------------------------+
    Parse Deploy Logs
    +----------------------------------------------------------+
    Parsing [2] Errors from Process Log [DeltaControlDaemon.log]
    Parsing [6] Errors from Process Log [DeltaControl.log]
    Parsing [3] Errors from Process Log [ds_jemail_a.1.20191112T152325053.out.log]
    Parsing [5] Errors from Process Log [ds_report_doc_generator_a.1.20191112T152329627.out.log]
    Parsing [1] Errors from Process Log [ds_report_generator_a.1.20191112T152328212.out.log]
    +----------------------------------------------------------+
    Check Delta License
    +----------------------------------------------------------+
    Found license file [/home/kxuser/kxinstall/delta-bin/config/.delta.lic]
    Delta license valid
    +----------------------------------------------------------+
    Check KDB+ License
    +----------------------------------------------------------+
    Found license file [/home/kxuser/kxinstall/delta-bin/config/k4.lic]
    KDB+ license valid
    +----------------------------------------------------------+
    Validate SSL Certificates
    +----------------------------------------------------------+
    Deploy is not TLS enabled skipping SSL Certificate Validation
    +----------------------------------------------------------+
    Write Summary File [platform-info/kxplatform/summary.txt]
    +----------------------------------------------------------+
    +----------------------------------------------------------+
    Finished [checkEnv.sh].
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    install.sh Finished.
    

## Single node deploy - Windows

This section deals with deploying the _KX Delta Platform_ in a non-clustered
single node deploy.

### Configuring the deploy

The Windows bundle contains a configuration script
`configurePlatformDeploy.bat` which can be used to update the configuration
files for the deploy.

This script will make the necessary changes to the install directory,
localhosts and KX Control Port in the following files:

  * delta.profile.bat (found in the delta-bin folder)
  * delta.instance.profile (found in the delta-bin folder)
  * failover.csv (found in the delta-bin/config folder)

To run the script, open a new command prompt and navigate to the delta-bin/bin
directory of the deploy and run the command `configurePlatformDeploy.bat` as
shown below:

    
    
    > configurePlatformDeploy.bat
    

Enter 1 when prompted for deploy type:

    
    
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
                     Configuring Platform Deploy
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    [1] Single Host Deploy
    
    [2] Multi-Host Deploy
    
    Select Node Type [1-2] : 1
    

**Hostname**

The `configurePlatformDeploy.bat` script will automatically configure the
hostname of your computer for a single host deploy and update the relevant
files. Before configuring the deploy, the host is set to â€˜localhostâ€™ in the
delta.profile.bat and delta.instance.profile.bat.

**Install Directory**

The install directory will replace the DELTA_HOME variable in the
delta.profile.bat, similarly to the hostname, this is automatically configured
by the script. Prior to the configuration script being executed, DELTA_HOME is
set as below:

    
    
    > type delta.profile.bat
    REM ############ INSTALL ENV ###############
    set "DELTA_HOME=<PATH TO DEPLOY ROOT>" 
    

This is then updated by the script to be set to the directory of your install
which returns the following screen:

![Screenshot](../img/updated-windows-home.png)

**Control Port**

The configures script will now prompt Port to be used by kx Control. The
default port that is already set in the delta.profile.bat and failover.csv is
2001. If you would like to use the default port either enter 2001 to the
command prompt or simply leave the prompt blank and hit return and 2001 will
be automatically used. If a different port e.g. 2017 is entered then 2017 will
be used as the KX Control Port. For this example we will use the default 2001
port by hitting enter and leaving the command line blank when prompted for the
port:

    
    
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    Enter DeltaControl Port [2001] :
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    

**CPU Affinity**

The script allows you to configure how many CPU cores you wish the system to
run on, when prompted, the command line will display the max amount of cores
the system can run on in brackets. The number of cores selected should be the
maximum number allowed under you kdb+ license.

If no value is entered to the command line then the maximum number of
processors available will be used by default.

    
    
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    Enter number of CPU Cores to be used: [Max: 8] :8
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    

**Note** : Please note that the KDB_CPU_AFFINITY and DCD_CPU_AFFINITY
variables in the delta.profile.bat will be updated to a hexadecimal affinity
value, e.g. if 6 was entered to the command line in this example the variable
would be set to 3F.

    
    
    set KDB_CPU_AFFINITY=3F
    set DCD_CPU_AFFINITY=3F
    

**TLS Encryption**

TLS configuration is detailed [here](../tls_overview/), for the purposed of
this section we will be deploying without TLS.

When prompted to deploy with TLS enter N.

    
    
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    Deploy with TLS/SSL Encryption? [Y/N]: N
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    

#### Licenses

The configure script now prompts for the location of the kdb+ (k4.lic) and KX
Delta Platform (.delta.lic) license files. Enter the path to the directory in
which they are stored:

    
    
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    Please enter location of kx license files (k4.lic/.delta.lic) [dir] :C:\licenses
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
                     Configuration Successful
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    

The script will check the directory provided to the command prompt for the
license files. If any of the licenses are not present in the directory they
will be prompted for again by the script. In the example below the license
file directory has been provided but the .delta.lic file is not present so the
script prompts for the location of this file:

    
    
    Please enter location of kx license files (k4.lic/.delta.lic) [dir] :C:\licenses
    ERROR: Failed to find .delta.lic in C:\licenses
    Location of .delta.lic [dir] :
    

### Post deploy checks

After the successful configuration of the deploy, the three files can be
checked to see the changes that have been made. In the delta.profile.bat the
DELTA_HOME variable will point to the install directory that was entered to
the command prompt.

    
    
    REM ############ INSTALL ENV ###############
    set "DELTA_HOME=C:\kxinstall\KxPlatformWinDeploy_4_4_1_1910111311" 
    

The delta.profile.bat should have been update with DELTACONTROL_PORT,
DELTACONTROL_HOST, DELTACONTROL_REMOTEHOST and DELTACONTROL_REMOTEPORT being
updated see below:

    
    
    > type delta.profile.bat
    set DELTACONTROL_PORT=2001
    set DELTACONTROLLOGSTREAMER_PORT=2002
    set DELTACONTROL_HOST=control-a.fd.com
    set DELTACONTROL_TDIR=%DELTADATA_HOME%\DeltaControlData\tdir
    set DELTACONTROL_QSRC=%DELTADATA_HOME%\DeltaControlData\qsrc
    set DELTACONTROL_ZIP=%DELTADATA_HOME%\DeltaControlData\zip
    set DELTACONTROL_FAILOVER=%DELTA_CONFIG%\failover.csv
    set DELTACONTROL_LOGFILE=DeltaControl.log
    set DELTACONTROL_REMOTEHOST=control-a.fd.com
    set DELTACONTROL_REMOTEPORT=2001
    

The delta.instance.profile now have the deploy hostname instead of localhost
for all _a process instances:

    
    
    > type delta.instance.profile.bat
    set ds_appServer_a_HOST=contol-a.fd.com
    set ds_appServer_a_PORT=3000
    set ds_appServer_a_TASKSET=
    set ds_appServer_b_HOST=NO_HOST_SET
    set ds_appServer_b_PORT=3000
    set ds_appServer_b_TASKSET=
    set ds_jemail_a_HOST=contol-a.fd.com
    set ds_jemail_a_PORT=3001
    set ds_jemail_a_TASKSET=
    set ds_jemail_b_HOST=NO_HOST_SET
    set ds_jemail_b_PORT=3001
    set ds_jemail_b_TASKSET=
    

**Note** : in a single host deploy, all b_hosts will be set to NO_HOST_SET by
default in the delta.instance.profile.bat and these should not be changed
unless running a multi-host install.

The final file updated by the configurePlatformDeploy.bat script is the
failover.csv; again the localhost and KX Control port were changed to what was
entered to the command prompt.

    
    
    > type config\failover.csv
    control-a.fd.com,2001
    

### Java Home

In order for the _KX Delta Platform_ to run successfully on Windows, Java must
be installed and the JAVA_HOME environment variable set to the path in which
Java is installed.

    
    
    > echo %JAVA_HOME%
    C:\Program Files\Java\jdk1.8.0_131
    

You should now be ready to bring up the deploy see
[here](../win_administration/)

