https://code.kx.com/platform/release_481/

# 4.8.1 - KX Delta Platform

Original URL: https://code.kx.com/platform/release_481/

# Changes in 4.8.1

## Key changes

## kdb Insights

From version 4.8.0, KX Delta Platform has incorporated a number of features
from [kdb Insights](https://code.kx.com/insights/1.9/core/index.html).

KX Delta Platform 4.8.1 extends the kdb Insights feature list to include:

  * REST API
  * Object Storage
  * SQL
  * PyKX (new to 4.8.1).

Access to these kdb Insights features is enabled using feature flags in your
kdb+ license file (k4.lic/kc.lic). Refer to
[Licenses](../deployment/licenses/#Licenses) for more details.

If you do _not_ intend to use kdb Insights features and are upgrading from a
version earlier than 4.8, you can continue using your existing licence file.

All KX Delta Platform customers, regardless of the status of the kdb Insights
feature flags in their license files, continue to receive updates to kdb+ as
part of the KX Delta Platform releases.

### Kdb+ 4.1

KX Delta Platform 4.8.1 uses the latest [q/kdb+ version
4.1](https://code.kx.com/q/releases/ChangesIn4.1/)

This includes many new and innovative features to the core offering such as:

  * Peach/Parallel Processing Enhancements 
  * Unlimited IPC/Websocket Connections
  * HTTP Persistent Connections
  * Multithreaded Data Loading
  * Socket Performance
  * Enhanced TLS Support and Updated OpenSSL
  * More Algorithms for At-rest Compression

### REST API

  * The REST Client provides sync and async methods callable from q. It also provides ease-of-use cloud integration by registering cloud platform authentication information.

[REST API Client](https://code.kx.com/insights/1.9/core/kurl/kurl.html)

  * The REST Server, exposes a RESTful interface to a kdb+ based system.  [REST API Server](https://code.kx.com/insights/1.9/core/rest-server/index.html)

### Object Storage

Kdb Insights running beneath the KX Delta Platform allows authentication with
cloud credentials via Kurl to get native access to cloud object storage.

[Object storage](https://code.kx.com/insights/1.9/core/objstor/main.html)

### SQL

Support for ANSI SQL is built into kdb Insights. KX SQL means a user does not
need knowledge of the q language to access KX Delta Platform data.

[SQL](https://code.kx.com/insights/1.9/core/sql.html)

### PyKX

Support for PyKX is built into kdb Insights. PyKX is an interface between q,
kdb+, underlying data types, and Python. Use PyKX to interact with kdb+ and
apply analytics against vast amounts of data in-memory or on-disk.

[PyKX](https://code.kx.com/pykx/2.4/).

### New Platform Assetsâ€‹

Full integration with the KX Machine Learning Toolkit through a Platform asset
package.

[ML](https://code.kx.com/platform/ml/).

Direct integration with MQTT through a Platform asset package.
[MQTT](https://code.kx.com/platform/mqtt/).

Established new vulnerability patching SLA. Closed out approximately 160 CVEs
in 2024.

### Compatibility and license information

KX Delta Platform on Windows

Kdb Insights features are not supported on Windows. KX Delta Platform uses
kdb+ on Windows from version 4.8.0. onwards.

Using kc.lic

To use a kc.lic instead of the default k4.lic, set the `use-kc-lic` option at
install. Refer to [install
options](../deployment/install_config_options/#General-options) for more
information.

Supported operating systems

Kdb Insights does not support some of the older operating systems that the KX
Delta Platform supports. Refer to [supported operating
systems](../deployment/prerequisites/#Kdb-insights) for more details.

