https://code.kx.com/insights/enterprise/cli/install.html

# kdb Insights Enterprise CLI - kdb products

Original URL: https://code.kx.com/insights/enterprise/cli/install.html

# CLI Installation

To use the CLI, you need to install Python and the Python package manager
[pip](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/key_projects/#pip) on your
system.

The supported Python versions are 3.8, 3.9, 3.10, 3.11 and 3.12.

KX Nexus

The KX Nexus repository will be sunsetted in the future. Nexus links on this
page are provided as a temporary alternative to the KX Downloads Portal for
existing users. The KX Downloads Portal is the preferred repository for all
use cases and KX Nexus links will be removed once the KX Nexus repository is
decommissioned.

## Install

Python and pip command names

`python` and `pip` must be available on your PATH. If alternative commands
such as `python3` are required, update the commands appropriately.

To install from the KX Downloads Portal, run `pip install` with the
appropriate credentials.

Existing users can use KX Nexus instead of the KX Downloads Portal until Nexus
is removed in a future version. To use KX Nexus, replace the
`https://portal.dl.kx.com/assets/pypi/` URL in the following commands with
`https://nexus.dl.kx.com/repository/kxi-pypi-public/simple/`.

    
    
    pip --no-input install --extra-index-url https://portal.dl.kx.com/assets/pypi/ kxicli
    

To install a specific version, run:

    
    
    KXI_CLI_VERSION=x.y.z # replace with the version you want to install
    pip --no-input install --extra-index-url https://portal.dl.kx.com/assets/pypi/ kxicli==$KXI_CLI_VERSION
    

You can see available versions on the [KX Downloads
Portal](https://portal.dl.kx.com/assets/pypi/).

Once installed, `kxi` is available for you to execute.

If the installation fails, you can run `pip` with the `--verbose` modifier to
find more information.

    
    
    pip --no-input install --verbose --extra-index-url https://portal.dl.kx.com/assets/pypi/ kxicli==$KXI_CLI_VERSION
    

## Upgrade

To upgrade the CLI, run the `pip install` command with the `--upgrade`
modifier as in the below example:

    
    
    # pass the '--upgrade' flag to pip
    pip --no-input install --upgrade --extra-index-url https://portal.dl.kx.com/assets/pypi/ kxicli
    

## Uninstall

To uninstall the CLI, run the following command:

## Air-gapped environments

By default, `pip` installs dependencies from the internet. To install the CLI
in an air-gapped environment, you must download the dependencies on a machine
connected to the internet and transfer the dependencies to the air-gapped
environment.

  1. Download the CLI and dependencies on an internet-enabled machine
    
        pip --no-input download -d bundle setuptools wheel --extra-index-url https://portal.dl.kx.com/assets/pypi/ kxicli
    tar -zcf bundle.tar.gz bundle
    

  2. Copy `bundle.tar.gz` to your air-gapped environment and run these commands to install it
    
        tar -zxf bundle.tar.gz
    pip install --no-index --find-links bundle kxicli
    

Target environment

The above commands assume the interpreter and system that the dependencies are
downloaded on match those of the target environment. If this is not the case,
use the [`--platform`, `--python-version`, `--implementation`, and
`--abi`](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/cli/pip_download/#overview) options to
fetch the dependencies matching the target environment.

