https://code.kx.com/insights/enterprise/azure-marketplace/azure-release-notes-previous.html

# Azure previous release notes - kdb products

Original URL: https://code.kx.com/insights/enterprise/azure-marketplace/azure-release-notes-previous.html

# kdb Insights Enterprise on Azure Marketplace - Previous Release Notes

This page outlines release notes from past releases. For the most recent
release of kdb Insights Enterprise on Azure Marketplace, refer to the [latest
release](azure-release-notes.html) page.

## 1.9.4

### Release Date

2024-06-20

Refer to the main release notes of [kdb Insights Enterprise version
1.9.4](../release-notes/previous.html#194).

### Known Issues

Expand to see the list of known issues here

Deployment is not possible in the following regions:

  * Australia Central 2
  * Germany West Central
  * Southeast Asia (Stage)
  * Australia South East
  * North Central US (Stage)
  * South Central US (Stage)

As a workaround, try to deploy into a different Azure Region.

### Third party dependencies

The Azure Marketplace deployment of kdb Insights Enterprise manages third-
party pre-requisites for you. The following versions are installed to your
selected subscription as part of the marketplace deployment:

  1. [cert-manager - 1.13.3](https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager)
  2. [nginx-ingress - 4.9.0](https://github.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx/releases/tag/helm-chart-4.9.0)
  3. [rook-ceph - 1.13.1](https://github.com/rook/rook/releases/tag/v1.13.1)
  4. Kubernetes - 1.27
  5. [Istio 1.20.2](https://github.com/istio/istio/releases/tag/1.20.2)

## 1.9.3

### Release Date

2024-05-30

Refer to the main release notes of [kdb Insights Enterprise version
1.9.3](../release-notes/previous.html#193).

### Known Issues

Expand to see the list of known issues here

Deployment is not possible in the following regions:

  * Australia Central 2
  * Germany West Central
  * Southeast Asia (Stage)
  * Australia South East
  * North Central US (Stage)
  * South Central US (Stage)

As a workaround, try to deploy into a different Azure Region.

### Third party dependencies

The Azure Marketplace deployment of kdb Insights Enterprise manages third-
party pre-requisites for you. The following versions are installed to your
selected subscription as part of the marketplace deployment:

  1. [cert-manager - 1.13.3](https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager)
  2. [nginx-ingress - 4.9.0](https://github.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx/releases/tag/helm-chart-4.9.0)
  3. [rook-ceph - 1.13.1](https://github.com/rook/rook/releases/tag/v1.13.1)
  4. Kubernetes - 1.27
  5. [Istio 1.20.2](https://github.com/istio/istio/releases/tag/1.20.2)

## 1.9.2

### Release Date

2024-05-15

Refer to the main release notes of [kdb Insights Enterprise version
1.9.2](../release-notes/previous.html#192).

### Known Issues

Expand to see the list of known issues here

Deployment is not possible in the following regions:

  * Australia Central 2
  * Germany West Central
  * Southeast Asia (Stage)
  * Australia South East
  * North Central US (Stage)
  * South Central US (Stage)

As a workaround, try to deploy into a different Azure Region.

### Third party dependencies

The Azure Marketplace deployment of kdb Insights Enterprise manages third-
party pre-requisites for you. The following versions are installed to your
selected subscription as part of the marketplace deployment:

  1. [cert-manager - 1.13.3](https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager)
  2. [nginx-ingress - 4.9.0](https://github.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx/releases/tag/helm-chart-4.9.0)
  3. [rook-ceph - 1.13.1](https://github.com/rook/rook/releases/tag/v1.13.1)
  4. Kubernetes - 1.27
  5. [Istio 1.20.2](https://github.com/istio/istio/releases/tag/1.20.2)

## 1.9.1

### Release Date

2024-05-03

Refer to the main release notes of [kdb Insights Enterprise version
1.9.1](../release-notes/previous.html#191).

###  New Features

  * Deployment allows the [Networking](installing-kx-insights-platform-on-azure.html#networking) Model to be Traditional or Overlay.

### Known Issues

Expand to see the list of known issues here

The deployment may fail at the final step due to a certificate related error
message.

This issue is known to impact the following Azure Regions:

Other regions may experience similar issues.

As a workaround, please try to deploy into a different Azure Region.

### Third party dependencies

The Azure Marketplace deployment of kdb Insights Enterprise manages the third-
party pre-requisites for you. The following versions are installed to your
selected subscription as part of the marketplace deployment:

  1. [cert-manager - 1.13.3](https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager)
  2. [nginx-ingress - 4.9.0](https://github.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx/releases/tag/helm-chart-4.9.0)
  3. [rook-ceph - 1.13.1](https://github.com/rook/rook/releases/tag/v1.13.1)
  4. Kubernetes - 1.27
  5. [Istio 1.20.2](https://github.com/istio/istio/releases/tag/1.20.2)

## 1.9.0

### Release Date

2024-04-03

Refer to the main release notes of [kdb Insights Enterprise version
1.9.0](../release-notes/previous.html#190).

###  New Features

### Third party dependencies

The Azure Marketplace deployment of kdb Insights Enterprise manages the third-
party pre-requisites for you. The following versions are installed to your
selected subscription as part of the marketplace deployment:

  1. [cert-manager - 1.13.3](https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager)
  2. [nginx-ingress - 4.9.0](https://github.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx/releases/tag/helm-chart-4.9.0)
  3. [rook-ceph - 1.13.1](https://github.com/rook/rook/releases/tag/v1.13.1)
  4. Kubernetes - 1.27
  5. [Istio 1.20.2](https://github.com/istio/istio/releases/tag/1.20.2)

## 1.8.3

### Release Date

2024-02-12

Refer to the main release notes of [kdb Insights Enterprise version
1.8.3](../release-notes/previous.html#1.8.3).

### Third party dependencies

The Azure Marketplace deployment of kdb Insights Enterprise manages the third-
party pre-requisites for you. The following versions are installed to your
selected subscription as part of the marketplace deployment:

  1. [cert-manager - 1.13.2](https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager)
  2. [nginx-ingress - 4.8.3](https://github.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx/releases/tag/helm-chart-4.8.3)
  3. [rook-ceph - 1.11.2](https://github.com/rook/rook/releases/tag/v1.11.2)
  4. Kubernetes - 1.27.3
  5. [Istio 1.19.1](https://github.com/istio/istio/releases/tag/1.19.1)

## 1.8.2

### Release Date

2024-01-29

Refer to the main release notes of [kdb Insights Enterprise version
1.8.2](../release-notes/previous.html#1.8.2).

### Third party dependencies

The Azure Marketplace deployment of kdb Insights Enterprise manages the third-
party pre-requisites for you. The following versions are installed to your
selected subscription as part of the marketplace deployment:

  1. [cert-manager - 1.13.2](https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager)
  2. [nginx-ingress - 4.8.3](https://github.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx/releases/tag/helm-chart-4.8.3)
  3. [rook-ceph - 1.11.2](https://github.com/rook/rook/releases/tag/v1.11.2)
  4. Kubernetes - 1.27.3
  5. [Istio 1.19.1](https://github.com/istio/istio/releases/tag/1.19.1)

## 1.8.0

### Release Date

2023-12-19

Refer to the main release notes of [kdb Insights Enterprise version
1.8.0](../release-notes/previous.html#1.8.0).

### New Features

  * **Data Encryption**

Data in transit within kdb Insights Enterprise can now be encrypted, providing
enhanced security. This feature meets compliance and regulatory requirements
and protects against cyber-security attacks. You can enable this as part of
your deployment. For more details, refer to [Encryption of data in
transit](https://code.kx.com/insights/1.8/enterprise/security/encryption-in-
transit.html).

### Third party dependencies

The Azure Marketplace deployment of kdb Insights Enterprise manages the third-
party pre-requisites for you. The following versions are installed to your
selected subscription as part of the marketplace deployment:

  1. [cert-manager - 1.13.2](https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager)
  2. [nginx-ingress - 4.8.3](https://github.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx/releases/tag/helm-chart-4.8.3)
  3. [rook-ceph - 1.11.2](https://github.com/rook/rook/releases/tag/v1.11.2)
  4. Kubernetes - 1.27.3
  5. [Istio 1.19.1](https://github.com/istio/istio/releases/tag/1.19.1)

## 1.7.3

### Release Date

2023-11-13

Please see the main release notes of [kdb Insights Enterprise version
1.7.3](../release-notes/previous.html#1.7.3).

### Third party dependencies

The Azure Marketplace deployment of kdb Insights Enterprise manages the third-
party pre-requisites for you. The following versions are installed to your
selected subscription as part of the marketplace deployment:

  1. [cert-manager - 1.13.2](https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager)
  2. [nginx-ingress - 4.7.3](https://github.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx/releases/tag/helm-chart-4.7.3)
  3. [rook-ceph - 1.11.2](https://github.com/rook/rook/releases/tag/v1.11.2)
  4. Kubernetes - 1.27.3

## 1.7.2

### Release Date

2023-10-27

Please see the main release notes of [kdb Insights Enterprise version
1.7.2](../release-notes/previous.html#1.7.2).

### New Features

  * kdb Insights Enterprise can now be deployed with the [Data Entitlements](https://code.kx.com/insights/1.7/enterprise/entitlements/index.html) beta feature turned on.

### Third party dependencies

The Azure Marketplace deployment of kdb Insights Enterprise manages the third-
party pre-requisites for you. The following versions are installed to your
selected subscription as part of the marketplace deployment;

  1. [cert-manager - 1.12.2](https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager)
  2. [nginx-ingress - 4.7.1](https://github.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx/releases/tag/helm-chart-4.7.1)
  3. [rook-ceph - 1.11.2](https://github.com/rook/rook/releases/tag/v1.11.2)
  4. Kubernetes - 1.26.3

## 1.7.1

### Release Date

2023-09-26

Please see the main release notes of [kdb Insights Enterprise version
1.7.1](../release-notes/previous.html#1.7.1).

### Third party dependencies

The Azure Marketplace deployment of kdb Insights Enterprise manages the third-
party pre-requisites for you. The following versions are installed to your
selected subscription as part of the marketplace deployment;

  1. [cert-manager - 1.12.2](https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager)
  2. [nginx-ingress - 4.7.1](https://github.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx/releases/tag/helm-chart-4.7.1)
  3. [rook-ceph - 1.11.2](https://github.com/rook/rook/releases/tag/v1.11.2)
  4. Kubernetes - 1.26.3

### Fixes

Rook-Ceph version [1.11.7](https://github.com/rook/rook/releases/tag/v1.11.7)
is replaced with version
[1.11.2](https://github.com/rook/rook/releases/tag/v1.11.2) due to an issue
collecting Ceph metrics. This caused the [Monitoring
Workbook](https://code.kx.com/insights/1.7/enterprise/azure-
marketplace/workbook-documentation.html) to contain some empty charts on the
[Cluster overview](https://code.kx.com/insights/1.7/enterprise/azure-
marketplace/workbook-documentation.html#cluster-overview) and [Rook-
Ceph](https://code.kx.com/insights/1.7/enterprise/azure-marketplace/workbook-
documentation.html#rook-ceph) tabs.

## 1.7.0

### Release Date

2023-09-04

Please see the main release notes of [kdb Insights Enterprise version
1.7.0](../release-notes/previous.html#1.7.0).

### Known issues

There is an issue with [rook-ceph -
1.11.7](https://github.com/rook/rook/releases/tag/v1.11.7) collecting ceph
metrics, causing the [kdb Insights Enterprise Monitoring
Workbook](https://code.kx.com/insights/1.7/enterprise/azure-
marketplace/workbook-documentation.html) to contain some empty charts on the
[Cluster overview](https://code.kx.com/insights/1.7/enterprise/azure-
marketplace/workbook-documentation.html#cluster-overview) and [Rook-
Ceph](https://code.kx.com/insights/1.7/enterprise/azure-marketplace/workbook-
documentation.html#rook-ceph) tabs. This has been resolved in version 1.7.1,
please contact [KX Support](https://code.kx.com/insights/1.7/enterprise/azure-
marketplace/support.html) to upgrade.

### Third party dependencies

The Azure Marketplace deployment of kdb Insights Enterprise takes care of the
third party pre-requisites for you. The following versions are installed to
your selected subscription as part of the marketplace deployment;

  1. [cert-manager - 1.12.2](https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager)
  2. [nginx-ingress - 4.7.1](https://github.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx/releases/tag/helm-chart-4.7.1)
  3. [rook-ceph - 1.11.7](https://github.com/rook/rook/releases/tag/v1.11.7)
  4. Kubernetes - 1.26.3

## 1.6.2

### Release Date

2023-07-13

Please see the main release notes of [kdb Insights Enterprise version
1.6.2](../release-notes/previous.html#162).

### New Features

### Third party dependencies

The Azure Marketplace deployment of kdb Insights Enterprise takes care of the
third party pre-requisites for you. The following versions are installed to
your selected subscription as part of the marketplace deployment;

  1. [cert-manager - 1.12.1](https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager)
  2. [nginx-ingress - 4.7.0](https://github.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx/releases/tag/helm-chart-4.7.0)
  3. [rook-ceph - 1.11.2](https://github.com/rook/rook/releases/tag/v1.11.2)
  4. Kubernetes - 1.25.6

## 1.5.3

### Release Date

2023-06-19

Please see the main release notes of [kdb Insights Enterprise version
1.5.3](../release-notes/latest.html#153).

## 1.5.2

### Release Date

2023-06-08

Please see the main release notes of [kdb Insights Enterprise version
1.5.2](../release-notes/previous.html#152).

## 1.5.0

### Release Date

2023-05-19

Please see the main release notes of [kdb Insights Enterprise version
1.5.0](../release-notes/previous.html#150).

### New Features

[NEW] Improved stability

  * In this new marketplace version, the kdb Insights Enterprise core system components are hosted in the System Node Pool along with the Azure services. This means the User Node Pool can be sized specifically for your assembly and data workflow needs.
  * Your System Node Pool can remain stable while your User Node Pool can be dynamic.

### Third party dependencies

The Azure Marketplace deployment of kdb Insights Enterprise takes care of the
third party pre-requisites for you. The following versions are installed to
your selected subscription as part of the marketplace deployment;

  1. [cert-manager - 1.11.1](https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager)
  2. [nginx-ingress - 4.6.0](https://github.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx/releases/tag/helm-chart-4.6.0)
  3. [rook-ceph - 1.11.2](https://github.com/rook/rook/releases/tag/v1.11.2)
  4. Kubernetes - 1.26.3

## 1.4.0

### Release Date

2023-03-01

[kdb Insights Enterprise version 1.4.0](../release-notes/previous.html#1.4.0)

### New Features

kdb Insights Enterprise is generally available on the Azure Marketplace as a
KX Managed App plan.

[NEW] Easy deployment

  * You can now use the Azure Marketplace configuration wizard to get up and running quickly and easily with kdb Insights Enterprise.

[NEW] Try before you buy

  * You can have your first month free of any KX license fees. Simply click through the marketplace to deploy the Product and enjoy!

[NEW] v1.4.0 Features

### Third party dependencies

The Azure Marketplace deployment of kdb Insights Enterprise takes care of the
third party pre-requisites for you. The following versions are installed to
your selected subscription as part of the marketplace deployment;

  1. [cert-manager - 1.11.0](https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager)
  2. [nginx-ingress - 4.5.2](https://github.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx/releases/tag/helm-chart-4.5.2)
  3. [rook-ceph - 1.10.11](https://github.com/rook/rook/releases/tag/v1.10.11)
  4. Kubernetes - 1.25.5

