https://code.kx.com/insights/enterprise/azure-marketplace/azure-login.html

# Azure Login - kdb products

Original URL: https://code.kx.com/insights/enterprise/azure-marketplace/azure-login.html

# Login

Connectivity when using Private IP addresses

If you have chosen Private IP address connectivity as part of the deployment
of kdb Insights Enterprise, refer to [Azure security](security.html#private-
ip-address) for more information about how to enable users to access the UI
and the API endpoint. Then follow the steps below.

KX Nexus

The KX Nexus repository will be sunsetted in the future. Nexus links on this
page are provided as a temporary alternative to the KX Downloads Portal for
existing users. The KX Downloads Portal is the preferred repository for all
use cases and KX Nexus links will be removed once the KX Nexus repository is
decommissioned.

## Create kdb Insights Enterprise users

Using a successful deployment:

  1. Select the deployment in the Azure Portal under **Managed applications**.

  2. Click on **Parameters and Outputs** in the left-hand navigation menu.

![Managed deployment output](images/managed_output.png)

  3. Copy the `keycloakUrl` output value and navigate to this URL in a new browser tab.

kdb Insights Enterprise uses [Keycloak](https://www.keycloak.org/) as its
Identity and Access Management component. To give users the access they
require, follow one of the guides below:

Refer to the documentation on Keycloak and the [role based
permissions](../security/authentication.html#roles) to determine the level of
permisions each user requires.

If you want to give users the ability to reset their password via email you
need to configure the [reset password
service](../configuration/security.html#reset-password-service).

## Login to kdb Insights Enterprise

When the deployment is complete and users have been created, they can follow
the steps below to login to kdb Insights Enterprise:

  1. Select the deployment in the Azure Portal under **Managed applications**.

  2. Click on **Parameters and Outputs** in the left-hand navigation menu.

![Managed deployment output](images/managed_output.png)

  3. Copy the `kdbInsightsEnterpriseUrl` value and navigate to this URL in a new browser tab.

![KXUi](images/SignIn.png)

  4. Log in with the username and password created in the [General Configuration](installing-kx-insights-platform-on-azure.html#general-configuration) step of the installation process or the credentials set in the section above.

  5. You are then directed to the kdb Insights Enterprise user interface.

![KXUi](images/insights_ui.jpg)

  6. For an introduction to the User Interface, refer to [kdb Insights Enterprise Overview](../user-interface/ui-overview.html).

There are additional tools and services available on the KX Downloads Portal,
such as the kdb Insights Enterprise [Language
Interfaces](https://portal.dl.kx.com/assets/raw/) and the [kdb Insights
CLI](https://portal.dl.kx.com/assets/pypi/). Both the [Language
Interfaces](https://nexus.dl.kx.com/#browse/browse:kxi-package-public) and the
[kdb Insights CLI](https://nexus.dl.kx.com/#browse/browse:kxi-pypi-public) are
available through the KX Nexus repository until Nexus is removed in the
future.

Azure namespaces

Remember! Cluster resources created using the Azure Marketplace are
preconfigured to use various namespaces. In most cases, when running `kubectl`
commands referenced in the documentation, remember to include the `-n
insights` argument, to make sure all resources under the "insights" namespace
appear, as well.

If you already have a KX license and an existing application, you can use the
[RT Bridge](../../microservices/rt/sdks/rt-bridge.html) to ingest data into
_kdb Insights Enterprise_ on Azure.

## Further Reading

